a very good evening the confrontations
between Pro Palestinian protesters and
the police are continuing on campuses
across the United States 12 protesters
were arrested this afternoon at the
University of Wisconsin in Madison as
police cleared an encampment there
tensions are also high in Los Angeles
where overnight counter protesters
attack Pro Palestinian demonstrators on
the campus footage from the scene
changed people using sticks and poles to
attack a makeshift barricade that had
been put up around the encampment police
did eventually respond to what the
University's Vice Chancellor described
as horrific acts of violence let him go
let him go there were scuffles too in
New York where police arrested dozens of
pro Palestinian demonstrators who were
HED up in a building at Colombia
University and they removed a protest
encampment a total of 300 people were
detained at Colombia and City College
elsewhere in the city the speaker of the
US House of representativ Mike Johnson
said the authorities needed to be called
in what are University officials waiting
on what do they need to see before they
stand up to these terrorist sympathizers
and that is exactly what they are what's
worse though is that Colombia's choice
to ignore the safety of their Jewish
students and appease anti-semites has
inspired even more hatefield protests to
pop up across the country and what we're
seeing right now is people wave
Hezbollah fles flags and and Hamas Flags
their homemade signs supporting what
happened on October 7th it's
outrageous the president of Colombia
University Manu shafik who's been under
immense political pressure in recent
days has appealed for a period of calm
we regret the protesters have chosen to
escalate the situation through their
actions said a statement we made the
decision early in the morning that this
was a law enforcement matter the NYPD
were best positioned to determine and
execute an appropriate response but this
is not confined solely to New York
protest that began organically some
weeks ago has now spread to 20 different
states and over 30 universities there
were dozens of arrests at the University
of Texas this week protests from coast
to coast Riot police on the grounds of
ivy league universities Yale Harvard
Berkeley the George Washington
University in DC it is spreading into a
national movement with protest
reappearing in places
where they have previously been cleared
so let's go first then to our
correspondent Emma vardy who sent this
from the UCLA it's been a political
mindfield for universities over the last
few weeks of course trying to strike
that right balance between upholding uh
Free Speech protecting students on
campus who just want to go about their
day and and then dealing with the claims
of anti-Semitism from some Jewish
students as well and all of those
tensions really boiled over here last
night it seems that what happened
happened at around 11:00 last night here
the pal prop Palestinian demonstration
the encampment here there was a surge of
counter protesters that led to Violent
clashes between these groups of of rival
protesters there were wooden barricades
that were then picked up and used as As
Weapons there was fireworks thrown uh
over the crowd and and there had been a
relatively small number of police on
site at that moment so the university
called in at the Los Angeles Police
Department the LAPD and of of course
they then suddenly rushed to try to
break up this violence but by then it it
had really escalated and it took police
a number of hours to separate those
protesters what there is now behind me
is that encampment as I say from the pro
Palestinian demonstration which remains
there outside the central the main
library of UCLA but it's now uh the
Rival demonstration by pro-israel
supporters is separated by some iron
railing so everything feels a lot calmer
now but it's a very strange atmosphere
for a university C campus and many
students and lots of teachers arrived
here to get today some of them had
driven quite quite distances they told
me and then pretty frustrated to find
that all classes were cancelled and at
UCLA there was particular frustration uh
because many students today would have
been taking midterm exams and had got
here especially for that some they told
me stayed up all night revising the
night before just to to come in and find
nothing happening here today well let's
cross from West Coast to East Coast Nom
ikbal is at Columbia University for us
this evening that statement from the
Columbia president man ship shaik it's
rather interesting because what we've
seen is that where police have been
taking down encampments protests have
sprung up again and now she is appearing
appealing for that period of calm noria
it remains to be seen whether she'll get
it well at the moment Christian it is
pretty calm and peaceful I mean as as
calm as New York City can be I guess uh
it's still noisy of course but it's
nothing compared to obviously what it
was last night where New York police
seem to carry out this coordinated raid
on encampments in different parts of the
city there are several universities here
uh Colombia is almost like the the main
Hub it's the the
focal point for these Nationwide
protests other encampments have been
inspired by uh by the pro Palestinian
supporters here but president shafik has
been under huge pressure from right-wing
politicians who say that she's not doing
enough to crack down on these protests
and then also from many of the the
student protesters themselves who are
really angry at what they say has been a
heavy-handed approach uh the police did
go in on April the 18th if you remember
uh and then there was a fear by some
students that it could happen again uh
there was this deadline that was set on
Monday for 2 p.m. for them to clear out
uh it kind of passed without incident
but then we saw the raids happen last
night uh but president shafik is is
saying look I'm I'm not against your
cuse I'm against uh your actions and I
think what really it came down to was
there's a there's a distinction between
protesting and disruption and when we
saw that building being taken over that
uh was the point where the police felt
uh sorry the president felt that the
police had to come in when you say it
there's a distinction between protesting
and
disruption is that how Republicans it
because I listened to the Senators this
afternoon and they didn't seem to be
making that distinction I mean people
are entitled under their first amendment
rights to go out and protest about a war
they have concerns about and yet they
they were talking about little Gaza and
supporters of Hamas they were all being
characterized as
one which the pro Palestinian supporters
say is just not reflective of their
movements I mean I've spent time in the
encampment speaking to them there are
lots of Jewish supporters among them and
some of the students have have made this
sort of point to me about how uh really
conservative politicians Republicans
particularly have been for years going
on about uh free speech on campus free
speech on campus and uh cracking down
and Council culture but they say it's
simply because they don't like this
particular speech that actually if you
look at uh you know the concept of free
speech in America that they are allowed
to protest they are allowed to
peacefully Pro protest so you know a lot
of them very angry but you know as many
of them say they're not surprised at the
the the right-wing politicians view on
this I think what many of them are
frustrated by is uh they feel that the
president uh sort of caved into that
president shafik was in front of
Congress a couple of weeks ago and she
was questioned by Republicans over what
is she doing to crack down on
anti-Semitism uh but uh look um students
uh they say these protests aren't going
to end and it's worth mentioning that
this was going on before October the 7th
there is a long history of uh people
here who've been protesting against the
Israeli government and Israeli policies
uh but for now the protests have abated
it remains to be seen whether they pop
up again just looking at these pictures
of
UCLA I mean are these people that are
attacking the encampment are they
students or are they professional
agitators and people who are putting the
universities there as a focal point I
mean are these people from Los from
wider Los Angeles that are getting
involved in
this well this is one of the points that
certainly here the New York uh city
mayor Eric Adams has made he says that
there are these outside agitators to
quote what he said that have come in and
caused this trouble um but a lot of the
students here don't really buy it they
say that they want to see evidence of of
of that um uh because they feel that the
whole movement has been tarred by these
accusations the police just haven't
given us any information on who these
individuals could be uh so at UCLA there
is also speculation and reports that
again it's Outsiders that have come in
uh maybe from different groups to try
and cause trouble for each side and that
uh extreme extremists I guess on both
sides are not representative of how
students on both sides feel but as I say
we've just not been given any details
yet on who exactly the police thinks
that these outside agitators are and
where is Joe Biden on this what what is
the president saying about the protest
it's a difficult one for him because of
course the the youth vote is is very
important within his
Coalition well President Biden's been
across this the whole time and he has
said that students have the right to
free speech but he's also been very
critical of the pro Palestinian protest
saying that uh uh he completely condemns
anti-Semitism as I say the the movement
has denied that and again today uh the
the White House spokeswoman released a a
statement saying that people are allowed
to to protest free speech is allowed
it's when you start destructing start
obstructing but you're right it's a
difficult spot for him it's very
unpredictable challenge because at best
I think he will probably hope it's a
distraction especially as we head
towards the election but at worst this
could really gain momentum I mean he's
pretty much heckled at lots of events he
turns up to the State of the Union
Address in March uh his moate had to be
rerooted from the capital to the white
from the White House of the capital is a
pretty short route because of pro
Palestinian demonstrators who had staged
a sit in on the road so um and I do ask
a lot of the students is this going to
affect your vote come November many of
them are not committed to that they say
that they don't want to think too far
ahead to the election that right now
what they're concentrating on is trying
to to ra a voice for people suffering in
Gaza namia thanks for your time this
evening